---

### M

Metadata: Why are they important?

Photo Attribution: Ecological Applications
Michener, W. K., Brunt, J. W., Helly, J. J., Kirchner, T. B. and Stafford, S. G. (1997), NONGEOSPATIAL METADATA FOR THE ECOLOGICAL SCIENCES. Ecological Applications, 7: 330–342. doi:10.1890/1051-0761(1997)007[0330:NMFTES]2.0.CO;2]

---

Metadata: Why are they important?

Policy decisions based on data can only be defended if the metadata are good quality

    Regulatory decisions based on undocumented data are not defensible
    Metadata accuracy and details are important as supporting evidence for the science and policy

Controversies arise when metadata are incomplete and/or absent

---

What is the Value to Scientists, Researchers, and other Data Creators?

Metadata allows data developers to:

    Avoid data duplication
    Share reliable information
    Publicize efforts – promote the work of a scientist and his/her contributions to a field of study
    Metadata reuse saves time and resources in the long-run

---

What is the Value to Data Users?

Metadata gives a user the ability to:

    Search, retrieve, and evaluate dataset information from both inside and outside an organization
    Find data: Determine what data exists for a geographic location and/or topic
    Determine applicability: Decide if a dataset meets a particular need
    Discover how to acquire the dataset identified; process and use the dataset
    Understand the dataset, including definitions of column names, or expected numerical ranges found in the data

---

What is the Value to Organizations?

Metadata helps ensure an organization’s investment in data:

    Documentation of data processing steps, quality control, definitions, data uses, and restrictions
    Ability to use data after initial intended purpose
    Allows organization to track data use and facilitates publication

Transcends people and time:

    Offers data permanence
    Creates institutional memory

Advertises an organization’s research:

    Creates possible new partnerships and collaborations through data sharing

---

The Utility of Metadata

Metadata can support:

    Data distribution (discovery, catalogs)
    Data management (provenance, accountability, liability)

---

Data Management: Provenance

Metadata records can be used to track data provenance accurately

    Are the data current?
    Are the data in a reliable format?
    Where are the data stored?
    Contact information
    Distribution policies, availability, pricing, URLs
    New derivations of the dataset

---

Data Management: Accountability

Metadata allows you to repeat a scientific process if:

    methodologies are defined
    variables are defined
    analytical parameters are defined

Metadata allows you to defend your scientific process:

    process is documented
    increasingly data savvy public requires metadata for consumer information

---

Concerns About Creating Metadata (1)

Even if the value of data documentation are recognized, researchers are often concerned about the effort required to create metadata that effectively describe their data.

---

Concerns About Creating Metadata (2)

Metadata creation and management should be treated as a standard part of the data development process.
Concern 	Solution
Workload required to capture accurate robust metadata 	Incorporate metadata creation into data development process – distribute the effort
Time and resources to create, manage, and maintain metadata 	Include in grant budget and schedule
Readability / usability of metadata 	Use a standardized metadata format
Discipline specific information and ontologies 	Use a standard ‘profile’ that supports discipline specific information

---

What is a Metadata Standard?

A standard provides a structure to describe data with:

    Common terms to allow consistency between records
    Common definitions for easier interpretation
    Common language for ease of communication
    Common structure to quickly locate information

In search and retrieval, standards provide:

    Documentation structure in a reliable and predictable format for computer interpretation
    A uniform summary description of the dataset

---

What does a metadata standard include?

Components of metadata:

    A metadata standard is made up of defined elements, including the type of information the user should enter (e.g. text, numbers, date)
    Examples of elements include:
        title, abstract, keywords
        persistent link, usage rights
        variables, units

---

Multiple Metadata Standards Exist: Examples (1)

---

Choosing a Metadata Standard: Factors (1)

Your data type

---

Choosing a Metadata Standard: Factors (2)

Your organization’s policies

---

What Makes a Good Metadata Record?

Metadata are developed continuously throughout the entire data lifecycle

---

What Makes a Good Metadata Record?

Consistency with commonly used fields.

Use Authority Files and Standard Vocabulary

Provide all of the critical information for: Identification

Provide all of the critical information for: Entity / Attribute

Provide all of the critical information for: Data quality

Provide all of the critical information for: Data lineage

Provide all of the critical information for: Access, Use and Liability Constraints

---

Steps to Create Quality Metadata

    Organize your information
        Did you write a project abstract to obtain funding for your proposal? Re-use it in your metadata!
        Did you use a lab notebook or other notes during the data development process that define measurements and other parameters?
        Do you have the contact information for colleagues you worked with?
        What about citations for other data sources you used in your project?
    Write your metadata using a metadata tool
    Review for accuracy and completeness
    Have someone else read your record
    Revise the record, based on comments from your reviewer
    Review once more before you publish

---

Tips for Writing Quality Metadata

Titles, Titles, Titles…

    Titles are critical in helping readers find your data
        While individuals are searching for the most appropriate datasets, they are most likely going to use the title as the first criteria to determine if a dataset meets their needs
        Treat the title as the opportunity to sell your dataset

    A complete title includes: What, Where, When, Who, and Scale
    An informative title includes: topic, timeliness of the data, specific information about place and geography

---

Tips for Writing Quality Metadata

Be specific and quantify when you can! The goal of a metadata record is to give the user enough information to know if they can use the data without contacting the dataset owner.

---